nf-tracer/bracer blog post (#20)
czbiohub/blog: _blog/tracer-bracer.md

---
layout: post
mathjax: true
title: Tools to Explore the Immune Repertoire
date: 2019-10-20
author: Clarissa Vazquez-Ramos
---

We are interested in how the immune system changes with age, and we accomplish that by building a clonal landscape of T and B cells to illustrate the diversity of the immune repertoire.

## What are T and B Cells?
<img align="right" src="/images/tracer-bracer/bcell.png" width="25%" height="25%">

> T and B cells are lymphocytes and active participants of the adaptive immune response. These cells serve to recognize pathogens in the body, such as a virus, through the molecules found on their surface: T cell receptors (TCR) and B cell receptors (BCR). T and B cells undergo V(D)J recombination—a process in which their DNA is shuffled—in order to develop their receptor which can potentially recognize pathogens. TCRs and BCRs accomplish this with the unique biological code they express in which can identify only a *specific antigen*; it can be thought of as two puzzle pieces that are meant to fit together. Although T and B cells serve the same purpose as participants in the adaptive immune response, the difference therein lies in their interactions with antigen-presenting cells and clonal expansion.

Reviewer: These cells use the molecules on their surface, T cell receptors (TCR) and B cell receptors (BCR), to recognize pathogens in the body, such as a virus.

> A T cell attacks and kills an antigen-presenting cell directly. A B cell secretes antibodies, leading it to become a plasma cell with several antibodies, and eventually lysing and releasing its antibodies into the bloodstream.

Reviewer: A B cell secretes antibodies, leading it to become a plasma cell with several antibodies, and eventually lysing and releasing its antibodies into the bloodstream.: need better wording, right now the text is confusing

<p align="center">
<img src="/images/tracer-bracer/tcell-bcell.png" alt="tcell vs bcell" width="45%" height="45%">
</p>

> When T and B cells encounter antigen-presenting cells, they undergo clonal expansion—a process in which T and B cells form clones of themselves to fight off pathogens, and remember them for future encounters. It is important to note though that when B cells clone themselves, they experience random mutations (hypermutation) to increase the binding affinity of their antibodies to antigens.  

Reviewer: expansion — a

look nicer with spaces

Reviewer: It is important to note though that when B cells clone themselves, they experience random mutations (hypermutation) to increase the binding affinity of their antibodies to antigens. 

this is wrong -- please revise and re-write

> We can explore clonal expansion in our single cells with the tools TraCeR and BraCeR.

Reviewer: in our single cells

this is not scientific language, unless you're talking about your cells in particular, replace with something like

in our single cell datasets

For each cell, an output directory is created with output from Bowtie2, Trinity, (BLAST), IgBlast, and Kallisto as well as files describing the TCR and BCR sequences that were assembled.

2. ***Summarize*** takes the directories output from the ***assemble*** phase of several cells. Recall that B cells undergo hypermutation during clonal expansion, so the results in this step differ for TraCeR and BraCeR. In TraCeR, clone assignments are generated for each cell. In BraCeR, we receive the cells and their CDR3 sequences as output.

> 

Reviewer: add a small figure with lines from both csvs

Author: could you send me a csv with output from bracer?

Reviewer: this wording is good

For TraCeR, we don't need to take any further steps after `summarize`, as we have the clonal groups already assigned. For BraCeR, extra steps outside of the tool are necessary to generate clone assignments. The CDR3 sequences must be translated into amino acid chains. These chains are used to identify cells with *similar* chains.

> 

Reviewer: read Derek's paper in Science earlier this year and check that the wording is correct

https://science.sciencemag.org/content/362/6420/1306/tab-article-info

> Overall, these tools helps us identify single cells that have undergone clonal expansion. We currently run our TraCeR and BraCeR analysis pipelines on [AWS Batch](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/batch/latest/userguide/what-is-batch.html) by manually submitting the jobs. We submit thousands of cells to be assembled asynchronously, then we pull the assembled cells down and summarize them to identify clonal groups. While this method already accomplishes our goal, we wanted to improve the reproducibility of the pipeline. Thus, we turned to Nextflow.

Reviewer: limit the use of the word our or any other type of language like this
this is a scientific blog, not a feelings one :) 

you can just say we run tracer&bracer analysis...

## What is Nextflow?
[Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) is a workflow manager which allows for scalable and reproducible scientific workflows using containers. It simplifies the implementation and deployment of complex, parallel workflows, which is necessary for the thousands of single cells we process. Because Nextflow is based on the dataflow programming model, you can effortlessly link processes together in one workflow.

> Nextflow has the capability to run pipelines on AWS Batch, but pipelines can also be ran locally.

Reviewer: pipelines in the cloud (e.g. AWS Batch) or locally.

### Step 2: TraCeR and BraCeR Assembly
In this step, we assemble the reads.

**`process assemble:`**
> This process takes in the unzipped fastq files from `reads_unzipped_ch` and reconstructs the TCR or BCR sequences, depending which pipeline is being ran. The reads are assembled asynchronously and the output is published to a user-specified directory. The directory is then output into a new `Channel`, ***assembled_ch***, which will be used in the last step.

### Step 3: TraCeR and BraCeR Summarize
Finally, in this last step we generate summary statistics and begin clone assignment.

**`process summarize:`**
> This last process calls the method [`.collect()`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/operator.html#operator-collect) on ***assembled_ch***. What this does is collects all the files emitted from ***assembled_ch*** into a list and uses that as the input for our `summarize` step. The output is published to the same directory where the assembled files are.

![nf-tracer run](/images/tracer-bracer/nf-tracer.gif)

### Step 4: Visualization

> Different visualizations you could create with output from TraCeR/BraCeR are clonal trees, clonal networks, pie charts, etc. A clonal network can help us visualize the landscape a cell population's clonal groups. For example, in the figures below we visualize the landscape of our [Tabula Muris Senis](https://github.com/czbiohub/tabula-muris-senis) data by observing the number of clones for two age groups: 3 months and 24 months. This network shows us that the number of clones has increased with age. If we look at the distribution of clonal cells vs. singletons (non-clonal cells) through a pie chart instead, we see that the ratios of singletons to clonal cells have changed.

Reviewer: again our is definitely not necessary

Reviewer: missing a conclusion paragraph

---
layout: post
mathjax: true
title: Tools to Explore the Immune Repertoire
date: 2019-10-20
author: Clarissa Vazquez-Ramos
---

We are interested in how the immune system changes with age, and we accomplish that by building a clonal landscape of T and B cells to illustrate the diversity of the immune repertoire.

## What are T and B Cells?
<img align="right" src="/images/tracer-bracer/bcell.png" width="25%" height="25%">

> T and B cells are lymphocytes and active participants of the adaptive immune response. These cells use the molecules on their surface, T cell receptors (TCR) and B cell receptors (BCR), to recognize pathogens in the body, such as a virus. T and B cells undergo V(D)J recombination — a process in which their DNA is shuffled — in order to develop their receptor which can potentially recognize pathogens. TCRs and BCRs accomplish this with the unique biological code they express in which can identify only a *specific antigen*; it can be thought of as two puzzle pieces meant to fit together. Although T and B cells serve the same purpose as participants in the adaptive immune response, the difference therein lies in their interactions with antigen-presenting cells and clonal expansion.

Author: thanks i'll add that in!

For each cell, an output directory is created with output from Bowtie2, Trinity, (BLAST), IgBlast, and Kallisto as well as files describing the TCR and BCR sequences that were assembled.

2. ***Summarize*** takes the directories output from the ***assemble*** phase of several cells. Recall that B cells undergo hypermutation during clonal expansion, so the results in this step differ for TraCeR and BraCeR. In TraCeR, clone assignments are generated for each cell. In BraCeR, we receive a database file containing all the reconstructed sequences (e.g. CDR3, V and J genes).

For TraCeR, we don't need to take any further steps after ***summarize***, as we have the clonal groups already assigned. For BraCeR, extra steps outside of the tool are necessary to generate clone assignments. Clone assignment is accomplished by first dividing the antibody heavy chain variable region (VH) sequences into groups which contain the same V and J genes and CDR3 length. A clone assignment is made if the amino acid CDR3 sequence shares *similarity* with other members within its groups. The similarity criteria is up to the investigators judgement. 

> Overall, these tools helps us identify single cells that have undergone clonal expansion. We currently run TraCeR and BraCeR analysis pipelines on [AWS Batch](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/batch/latest/userguide/what-is-batch.html) by manually submitting [jobs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/batch/latest/userguide/jobs.html). We submit thousands of cells to be assembled asynchronously, then pull the assembled cells down and summarize them to identify clonal groups. While this workflow already carries out the analysis, we wanted to improve its reproducibility. Thus, we turned to Nextflow.

Reviewer 2: I think you should change the tense of this paragraph:

```suggestion
Overall, these tools helps us identify single cells that have undergone clonal expansion. We previously ran TraCeR and BraCeR analysis pipelines on [AWS Batch](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/batch/latest/userguide/what-is-batch.html) by manually submitting [jobs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/batch/latest/userguide/jobs.html). We submitted thousands of cells to be assembled asynchronously, then pulled the assembled cells down and summarized them to identify clonal groups. While this workflow carried out the analysis, we wanted to improve its reproducibility. Thus, we turned to Nextflow.
```

To frame the story of the post as "this is what I did" rather than "this is what we want to do".

Nextflow has the capability to run pipelines in the cloud (e.g. AWS Batch) or locally.

## The Implementation
The implementation performs three steps which are linked together through `Channels`. A `Channel` has two major properties: sending messages and receiving data. A `Channel` sends messages in an asynchronous manner in which the operation will complete immediately, without having to wait for the receiving process. It will also receive data, which is a blocking operation where the receiving process is stopped until the message has arrived. The figure below illustrates how the workflow manages the three different steps. Steps 1 and 2 are handled asynchronously while Step 3 relies on the completion of Step 2 before starting.
<p align="center">
<img src="/images/tracer-bracer/nf-workflow.png" alt="nextflow workflow" width="70%" height="70%">
</p>

### Step 1: Preparation
The first step is to prepare the reads for the next processes. In this specific workflow, zipped fastq pair files are expected. Unzipping them first is necessary as the next steps only work wit unzipped files.

**`process unzip_reads:`**

> > The first step is to open a `Channel` using the method [`.fromFilePairs()`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/channel.html#fromfilepairs). This method returns the file pairs matching the [glob](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/essential/io/fileOps.html#glob) pattern input by the user. The fastq files get unzipped and passed into a new `Channel`, ***reads_unzipped_ch***,for the following process.

Reviewer 2: I still think the blockquote formatting is very awkward here–it's not a quote, and the italics are jarring. A single bullet point would be better: 

 * The first step is to open a `Channel` using the method [`.fromFilePairs()`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/channel.html#fromfilepairs). This method returns the file pairs matching the [glob](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/essential/io/fileOps.html#glob) pattern input by the user. The fastq files get unzipped and passed into a new `Channel`, **reads_unzipped_ch**, for the following process.

(using only two `**` for emphasis on reads_unzipped_ch)

Reviewer 2: Also there is a missing space after **reads_unzipped_ch**

Author: switched to bullet points

### Step 2: Assembly
In this step, we assemble the reads with either TraCeR or BraCeR. The figure below illustrates a run with TraCeR.

**`process assemble:`**

> > This process takes in the unzipped fastq files from `reads_unzipped_ch` and reconstructs the TCR or BCR sequences, depending which analysis is being ran. The reads are assembled asynchronously and the output folders are published to a user-specified directory. These same folders are also passed into a new `Channel`, ***assembled_ch***, which will be used for the last process.

Reviewer 2: Same as above

Reviewer 2: Maybe move the `nf-tracer.gif` figure here, where you mention it.

Author: I thought about that, but I don't want to break apart the steps with an image. I'll remove that line where i mention the tracer run to after all the steps.

### Step 3: Summarize
Finally, in this last step we generate summary statistics and begin clone assignment.

**`process summarize:`**

> > This last process calls the method [`.collect()`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/operator.html#operator-collect) on ***assembled_ch***. This method collects all the files emitted from ***assembled_ch*** into a list and uses that as input for this process. The output is published to the same directory where the assembled files are.

Reviewer 2: Same comment as above

For each cell, an output directory is created with output from Bowtie2, Trinity, (BLAST), IgBlast, and Kallisto as well as files describing the TCR and BCR sequences that were assembled.

2. ***Summarize*** takes the directories output from the ***assemble*** phase of several cells. Recall that B cells undergo hypermutation during clonal expansion, so the results in this step differ for TraCeR and BraCeR. In TraCeR, clone assignments are generated for each cell. In BraCeR, we receive a database file containing all the reconstructed sequences (e.g. CDR3, V and J genes).

> For TraCeR, we don't need to take any further steps after ***summarize***, as we have the clonal groups already assigned. For BraCeR, extra steps outside of the tool are necessary to generate clone assignments. Clone assignment is accomplished by first dividing the antibody heavy chain variable region (VH) sequences into groups which contain the same V and J genes and CDR3 length. A clone assignment is made if the amino acid CDR3 sequence shares *similarity* with other members within its groups. The similarity criteria is up to the investigators judgement.

Reviewer 2: Oh I forgot this one: "amino acid CDR3 sequence" is a bit awkward. I'd re-order ("CDR3 amino acid sequence") or maybe say "CDR3 peptide sequence".

Author: 👍

---
layout: post
mathjax: true
title: Tools to Explore the Immune Repertoire
date: 2019-10-25
author: Clarissa Vazquez-Ramos
---

> We are interested in how the immune system changes with age, and we accomplish that by building a clonal landscape of T and B cells to illustrate the diversity of the immune repertoire.

Reviewer: How the immune system changes with age is highly relevant topic and we have investigated that in [Tabula Muris Senis](https://biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/661728v1) by building a clonal landscape of T and B cells to illustrate the diversity of the immune repertoire.

The figure below illustrates a Nextflow run with TraCeR.

![nf-tracer run](/images/tracer-bracer/nf-tracer.gif)

### Step 4: Visualization
Different visualizations you could create with output from TraCeR and BraCeR include clonal trees, clonal networks, pie charts, etc. A clonal network can help visualize the landscape of a cell population's clonal groups. For example, in the figures below we visualize the landscape of [Tabula Muris Senis](https://github.com/czbiohub/tabula-muris-senis) dataset by observing the number of clones for two age groups: 3 months and 24 months. This network shows us that the number of clones has increased with age. If we look at the distribution of clonal cells vs. singletons (non-clonal cells) through a pie chart instead, we see that the ratios of singletons to clonal cells have changed.

<img align="right" src="/images/tracer-bracer/bracer-output.png" alt="bracer output" width="48%" height="48%">
<img src="/images/tracer-bracer/tracer-output.png" alt="tracer output" width="48%" height="48%">
<p align="center">
<img src="/images/tracer-bracer/legend.png" alt="legend" width="50%" height="50%">
</p>

## Conclusion

> Single-cell analyses are key in investigating clonal expansion; however, with the growing number of datasets it has become increasingly difficult to create reproducible workflows to handle them. When implemented together, these tools enable scientists to conduct large and complex analyses in a single, effortless workflow, allowing for the production of beautiful clonal landscapes.

Reviewer: allowing for the production of beautiful clonal landscapes. [not scientific language]--> [replace with] allowing for the production of easy to interpret visualizations.

> Exploring the immune repertoire and its diversity has never been more clear!

Reviewer: definitely not scientific language :) I suggest replacing with the following:

Our example illustrates how to use as a way of exploring the immune repertoire and its diversity, but the scope of such tools is far larger and key to reproducible science in the age of big (single-cell) datasets!
